Hi and welcome back.
In this video, we're going to look at
how to run Python from our console.
Sometimes, we won't have access to PyCharm
or, you know, an IDE when we're running our Python programmes
because we'll be in, for example, a server,
we want to share a programme with someone who doesn't have
that IDE and so forth,
so it can be handy to be able to run our Python
programmes outside of any specific environment.
So the console,
is a text interface to your computer,
you probably have come across it before.
You can basically run anything by using text,
you can like open files, copy them, you can run programmes,
you know basically anything that doesn't
have a graphical interface
and many things in software are done through the console
just because you know sometimes it's just not worth
developing a nice graphical interface.
If you're making a tool for example
to help you with formatting your code nicely,
sometimes you don't need a graphical interface for that.
If you are accessing a database,
you may want to only run the SQL commands
and now necessarily have a graphical interface
that goes with it.
If you're writing code, sometimes you may not
want a graphical interface to write your code with,
maybe a text editor is enough.
There's many situations where there's just not
a reason to have a nice graphical interface
for something so whoever developed that
just made it into a text programme.
And those text programmes normally run in a console.
So in order to open a console in your computer,
you can open cmd dot exe on Windows,
if you search for it just type cmd dot exe on the search bar
or you know whatever else, depends on the
Windows version you're using,
I'm sure it will come up, it's a very popular
thing in Windows.
If you're using Mac, you wanna open up terminal dot app,
this is the app that Mac comes with
in order to launch a console.
And on Linux, you can open the Terminal app.
Any of these will give you essentially something
that looks more or less like this.
It'll be a black box
with some text in it and you can type some more text.
Here's an example of typing Python in that console.
When I type Python, what appears
is some more text and then,
three crocodile clips at the bottom
and there I can type some Python code
and this programme here will immediately run the Python code
I type and essentially let me type Python code real time
and see the output of the code immediately.
By the way, Python 2.7 is the version you can see here
and that's the default on Mac OS 10 which is what I'm using,
if you're using a different operating system,
you may see a different number here.
For example, in this example here I'm running the programme
Python3.7 which is all one word
and that's a single programme and then you can see
that that runs Python3.7.0b1
which is the beta when I was recording this course,
Python3.7 hadn't come out just yet
but it was already available just for, you know,
early adopters.
So Python and Python3.7, completely different programmes
even though they are essentially the same Python
but a different version, they're completely different things
to our computer.
You can type anything in here
and what the computer's gonna do is it's gonna try to run
whatever you type
and it just so happens that Python and Python3.7
are two things that our computer can type.
By the way, on Windows this will only work
if you checked add Python to PATH during the initial
installation but if you didn't,
you can reinstall it and make sure to check it
and that's this little box over there,
it may look slightly different in newer Python versions
just make sure to check it, this box,
if you see it when you're on Windows
otherwise it won't be added to the PATH
and it won't work on your terminal or on your console.
So what is the PATH?
We're talking about the PATH as something
and this is a global variable that your
operating system uses to specify where to find programmes
that you may wanna run.
So when we type Python,
that's a programme and if the programme
is inside a folder and that folder is inside the PATH,
then this will work, your computer will be able
to find the Python programme and it will be able
to launch it.
If it is not in a folder
which is in the PATH, it won't work,
it will just tell you we couldn't find this programme.
Here's an example of me running a programme
that was not found.
I typed ngrok which is another programme
but I don't have it in my PATH
so it just said command not found.
My computer doesn't know what that is.
You could've installed this programme,
you could have you know downloaded this programme
but if it's not inside a folder which is in your PATH,
your computer won't be able to run it through the terminal.
So that's important okay?
So you can see what's in your PATH
by typing this on Mac OS 10 or on Linux,
just type echo dollar PATH
and it will tell you all the folders
that are part of your PATH, any programme
that you have inside any of these folders
will be executable by you typing the program's name.
As you can see, you've got something
like slash library, slash frameworks
slash Python dot framework slash versions
slash 3.7 slash bin.
And then you've got a colon and then the next folder begins.
So you've got a few folders,
or I've got a few folders in here
and as you can see, one of them is the binaries folder
of Python3.7 followed by, you know, some node version
8.5 followed by some ruby thing,
there's a few things here, few folders
and whenever I type Python, what my computer's doing
is it's going into this bin folder
and it's checking if Python is there.
If it isn't then it moves over to the next folder
and then to the next one and so forth
and if it can't find it in any of them,
it'll say command not found, okay?
So echo, dollar, PATH on Mac OS 10 or on Linux
will tell you what's on your PATH.
And on Windows there's a few steps,
as usual on Windows, you've got a few things to do
but I've attached a blog post
to the resources section of this lecture,
you can see it if you click on the curriculum
and down here on the top left,
and there's a blog post attached there
with some instructions for the various versions
of Windows, Windows 10, 8, 7 and so forth.
So you can have a wee look at that.
So environment variables.
Well the PATH is an example of an environment variable
and these are just global variables
available to all programmes that run in the environment
and normally the environment is your computer.
So, if you have
more than the PATH as an environment variable,
your programmes will have access to the path
and whatever other variables you decide to have,
you can have multiple ones if you want.
And here's how you can look at the environment variables
you've already got.
So if you type export on Mac OS 10 or on Linux,
you'll see all the environment variables
you've got currently available.
You can create more and we're not really
going to get into how you can create more
in this course, but you can create more
and then any programme you launch within that environment
will have access to those variables.
The resource linked in this lecture
explains how you can add more environment variables
on Windows.
Modifying your PATH is something you can do
and again the resource linked in the lecture explains
how to do that, but it can be dangerous
because your computer is actually relying on the PATH
to find many of the programmes it uses all the time,
if you change it and you make your computer
unable to find a lot of the programmes it needs,
you may have some trouble.
So just don't change the PATH unless you know
exactly what you're doing,
just reinstall Python if you have to on Windows
and make sure to check add to PATH
in order to make it work.
That's it for this lecture though,
I just wanted to give you a quick overview
of what the PATH is and how you can open up Python
from your terminal.
In the next video, we're gonna go a bit more hands on
and actually write some code in the terminal.
I'll see you on the next video.